IMF warns food shortages could spark social unrest, demand for higher wagesBy David Smith and Larry ElliottThe GuardianThu 19 Apr 2018 08.10 EDTLast modified on Thu 19 Apr 2018 08.11 EDTThe International Monetary Fund has warned that rising food prices could lead to social unrest and demands for higher wages in the coming months.The fund, which is meeting this week in Washington, said that the cost of a basket of staple grains had risen by 40% in the past year. It blamed poor harvests in the Black Sea region and the imposition of export controls in Russia, Argentina and Vietnam. The IMF warned that the higher cost of food would “likely lead to social unrest, wage demands and tighter fiscal positions”.“The recent jump in food prices could be a precursor to an acceleration of inflation globally,” said Maurice Obstfeld, the IMF’s chief economist. “The food price shock is not yet fully reflected in headline inflation. The risk of social unrest is high in countries where food accounts for a high share of household expenditure.”The IMF’s warning comes as the world is still grappling with the aftermath of the 2008 food price crisis, which saw prices rise by 125% in two years. The unrest that followed included riots in Egypt, Haiti and Mexico and led to the deaths of 1,000 people in Madagascar.The IMF said that the current food price rise was not as steep as the one nine years ago but that the consequences could be as bad. In the 2008 crisis, the rising cost of food triggered a wave of inflation in many countries, including Britain, where prices rose to a 16-year high in 2008.The IMF said that the rising cost of food was likely to lead to an increase in the price of other goods and services. It also said that the price of food would probably continue to rise in the next few months. “The risk of a further rise in grain prices remains high, given that grain inventories are at their lowest level in a decade,” it said.The IMF warned that the rising cost of food could make it harder for central banks to keep inflation under control. “The current jump in food prices, if sustained, could be a major threat to global central banks’ efforts to maintain price stability,” it said.The IMF said that policymakers needed to monitor the situation carefully and take action to protect the most vulnerable people. “Policymakers should also consider measures to prevent hoarding and market manipulation, and to reduce food waste,” it said.The food price rise is a blow to the global economy at a time when growth is slowing and political risks are rising. The IMF has already cut its growth forecast for this year to 3.5% from 3.9%.The rising cost of food has also led to a rise in the price of fertiliser. The IMF said that this could have a “significant impact” on global agricultural production. It said that a large share of fertiliser was used in developing countries, where it accounted for about a third of the cost of production. The IMF said that the rise in fertiliser prices would “likely lead to lower agricultural productivity and higher food prices”.The IMF warned that the rising cost of food could also lead to an increase in poverty. It said that the number of people living on less than $1.90 a day had risen to 736 million in 2015 from 702 million in 2013.The fund said that governments needed to take action to protect the most vulnerable people. “Policymakers should also consider measures to prevent hoarding and market manipulation, and to reduce food waste,” it said.The food price rise is a blow to the global economy at a time when growth is slowing and political risks are rising. The IMF has already cut its growth forecast for this year to 3.5% from 3.9%.“The IMF’s warning comes as the world is still grappling with the aftermath of the 2008 food price crisis, which saw prices rise by 125% in two years,” said the economist Dr Andrew Simms. “The unrest that followed included riots in Egypt, Haiti and Mexico and led to the deaths of 1,000 people in Madagascar.”“The IMF said that the current food price rise was not as steep as the one nine years ago but that the consequences could be as bad. In the 2008 crisis, the rising cost of food triggered a wave of inflation in many countries, including Britain, where prices rose to a 16-year high in 2008.”“The IMF said that the rising cost of food was likely to lead to an increase in the price of other goods and services. It also said that the price of food would probably continue to rise in the next few months. ‘The risk of a further rise in grain prices remains high, given that